# unique_molecules_parallel.sh

[unique_molecules](unique_molecules.md) is used for identifying and discarding
structural duplicates in a set of molecules.

As datasets get larger, run times can become prohibitive.

The most straightforward way of lowering the run-time is to preprocess the
input file into disjoint subsets, where it is guaranteed that if duplicates
exist, they will be in the same file. unique_molecules_parallel uses [msort_parallel](msort.md)
to do this. It sorts by molecular formula, and places the output into the
specified number of chunks
```
msort_parallel.sh -h <threads> -p -q -M nc=<threads> -D <output> -k formula haystack.smi
```
which creates \<threads\> output files where it is guaranteed that all molecules
with the same molecular formula will be in the same file. msort_parallel is very
efficient: in 2026, we sort a file containing 150M smiles in about 5 minutes
using 32 cores. But it did take 17GB of RAM, which seems too high...

The final step of processing is to run unique_molecules in serial mode on each
of the chunks generated.

Since unique_molecules_parallel is a wrapper for unique_molecules, all the same
options are supported. In addition, the number of threads should be specified,
it defaults to 2, which is probably not what you want.

```
unique_molecules_parallel.sh -thr 16    -c -l -g all -I -S unique haystack.smi
```
all options after the number of threads specification are passed directly to
unique_molecules.

Note however that since the first step in processing is to call msort_parallel,
only one input file can be processed, and input from stdin is disallowed.
unique_molecules can do both.

For haystacks larger than what can reasonably be processed on a single
machine, msort could be used to generate a larger number of chunks and
those could be individually processed on a cluster. The limitation
may be memory consumption in msort_parallel.

## Options
msort_parallel supports many options in common with other *_parallel tools
as well as some specific to this tool.

```
 -msort \<opts\>        options passed directly to msort (in addition to -k formula)
```

It is important to note that this tool uses temporary files, which are
placed in the '-tmpdir' directory, which is /tmp by default, change
if needed.
msort_parallel will create temporary files which are the
same aggregate size as the input. Then individual unique_molecules
invocations on each shard will create temporary files with their results. Therefore
a worse case usage would be three copies of the input

1. chunks generated by msort_parallel
2. per-chunk unique molecules generated by serial unique_molecules invocations.
3. the concatenated result of the unique molecules in each chunk.

The last step can be avoided with the `-nj` option which does *not* join
the step 2 intermediate files and leaves them in split form.

The sorting in msort_parallel is not necessarily ordered, so you cannot
depend on input ordering being preserved. msort_parallel could be made
stable, but possibly at the expense of further memory and performance penalties.

## Historical Notes
The unique molecules problem continues to be important in Cheminformatics.
Over the years we have tried many different approaches. This section describes
some of the earlier work on this problem, including some failures. It is
included here just as a historical record.

# Large Datasets
Some thoughts on handling larger datasets.

A tool like unique molecules must necessarily scale with the
number of molecules in the input, and the memory requirments
will scale with the number of distinct structures encountered.

Up to several tens of millions of molecules, this will be OK.

For example, running unique_molecules on 34M molecules generated
by making changes to Chembl, runs in about 29 minutes, while consuming
as much as 7GB of RAM. This may be just fine.

The process can be sped up in a number of ways.

The most straightforward is to split the dataset into different
streams, that are guaranteed to be different. For example if the
input is split into files, each of which has molecules with a given
number of heavy atoms, those files can be processed separately. Clearly
a molecule with 10 atoms need not be compared with a molecule with 11 in 
order to find duplicates.

Obviously these separate files can be processed in parallel, and the memory requirements
for each job will be modest.

Taking this concept one step further, perhaps the file could be
divided by molecular formula, with files containing only molecules
with the same molecular formula. Again, files can be processed independently
and memory requirements will be lower.

# Alternative Approaches
Rather than creating separate files, how about we just sort the file
by molecular formula and write something to do uniqueness, but aware
of the molecular formula from one line to the next - and never compare any two molecules with
different formulae.

Given the set of 34M molecules, we can run
```
fileconv -g all -p noname -p MF -S with_formula file.smi
```
which appends the molecular formula to the names in `with_formula`.
```
NC1=CC=C(N(CCF)CCF)C=C1 CHEMBL148945 C10N2F2H14
```
This can be sorted with standard unix `sort`. This is done in about 25 seconds,
but consumes 7.6 GB of RAM.
```
sort -k 3,3 --parallel 8 ...
```
`sort` is very sophisticated, and has options for specifying the buffer
size to use. For larger datasets, this could be used for limiting the
RAM used, and using temporary files.

Once the sorted file is available, the tool `unique_molecules_sorted` can
be used to look for duplicates. If the molecular formula is different from
one row to the next, smiles interpretation is not needed. But if there
are consecutive lines with the same formula, smiles interpretation is
needed. If that is done, the file can be processed in just under 12 minutes.
This could of course be overlapped
```
sort -k 3,3 -parallel 8 file.smi | unique_molecules_sorted -C 3 -v -
```
which would avoid the need for a large temporary file.

Overall, this is not worth it. We can process the original file in 29
minutes using `unique_molecules`. The alternative is a three step process
1. 13 minutes - use fileconv to append the molecular formula
2. 25 seconds - sort the resulting file
3. 12 minutes - unique molecules using the molecular formula as a guard.

For a total run time of about 26 minutes. Not much different from the
29 minutes used by unique_molecules. And the highest RAM requirement
is about the same - this time with 'sort'.

The best way to do approach this problem is likely to create separate
files, split by formula, and process those separately and in parallel.
There is no existing LillyMol tool to do this, but it would be easy to 
do.
